Any idea at all we were just talking about?
None. None whatsoever.
Welcome to AV testing podcast, your modern testing podcast. Your hosts, Alan and Brent
will be here to guide you through topics on testing, leadership, agile, and anything else
that comes to mind. Now on with the show. Hey everybody. Oh, that sounds like a song.
Hey, whatever. Hey.
Bet worst intro ever. I'm Paul.
I'm Bert.
And here we are on the Paul and Bernie show.
Did you catch on Twitter where the name Paul came from? Why I'm Paul?
I did. I have already forgotten.
So, uh, I, we have our, our lawn kind of just joins with the neighbor's lawn. So I just mow
their lawn. I just mow their lawn for him. When I mow our lawn, I just mow the whole thing.
So it all looks even and nice. It would be kind of a dick move for me not to mow their lawn,
but I've been doing it for a couple of years and, um, she gives gifts and the other day she dropped
off a nice gift card for a local restaurant. And, and it said, Paul, thank you very much.
You make the lawn look great. So all this time she's thought my name is Paul.
And I figured the only Seattle way to handle this is to change my name to Paul.
It is very Seattle-y. I, I can't just, I can't, I don't have the time or energy to go over and
correct it and cause embarrassment to somebody else. I'll just be Paul from now on.
You're born and raised in the PNW, right?
I was born in Spokane, which is technically P N W then moved over to this here area when
I was three years old. So yeah, pretty much been here my whole life.
So the whole Washington, the answer is yes. The whole Washington nice thing is, is bred into you.
Whereas I am a transplant from, from SoCal, right? Where, where we invented, right? Road rage.
It's because it's because you are more important than everyone around you by default,
due to your self awesomeness. Certainly when I'm on the road, that is absolutely true.
That's true all the time. You're a dick. Yeah. Sadly, sadly, I think the majority of the world
agrees with your point. Yes, they do. Yes, they do. Today was a day off at unity. Just one of
our during the summer, we get an extra Friday off a month. Kind of cool. Went for a bike ride
this morning. Did my new favorite mountain bike trail. It was fun. So anything else new,
tell me what's up and then we'll get into our topics.
What is up? So spent a lot of time thinking about our last podcast. Right. I thought that
one having been playing really well since he said that they're like, yeah, they, yeah,
no, the yesterday they have. The short answer is yes, but the brand answer is much longer.
So they now as of yesterday, they have gotten their second club record for wins in a row.
Their, their, their record is 15 wins in a row. That was done like ages ago, probably the
Randy Johnson era. And they have multiple times where they did 10 in a row. But yesterday,
they got to 11 and I'm hoping for 12 today. Again, I would, as mentioned last week,
you probably had something else to talk about other than the Mariners spot last week.
If they would just put the darn games on a streaming service, I guess I found out that
Fubo has root. So I may switch to them. So anyway, what were you,
what were you reflecting on from last week or two weeks ago, last time?
Oh, by the way, what episode number is this 163?
Uh, 62, I believe.
62. Okay, cool. Cool. Cool. Anyway, go on.
Uh, soon to be titled random bits of random randomness.
Oh, that's a show. You snip that you were right. No, it is 163.
God, this love being right. Anyway, tell me, tell me the story of why you're thinking about
last week and then we'll go on. No, I just thought that that so first and foremost,
you know, brief retrospective number one, you starting the conversation,
setting expectations with the guests. Brilliant. Brilliant.
I didn't even know I did that, but I'll take it.
Yeah. You, you, you basically within the first two minutes, you said,
oh, and by the way, this is not going to be an interview.
Alan proactively, like I will not hear on Twitter, uh, that, that we interviewed you wrong.
Right. That, that when we did, you know, we had Anne Marie on people were mad because the
interviewers talked too much. And, and obviously I didn't set their expectations
appropriately. I just wanted to get that underway. Anyway, cool.
And, and, and he was cool. I think the fun guy, he's, he,
if you haven't listened to one 62 yet with Kirk, go listen to it now. We'll wait.
And then Alan inserts episode one 62 in the middle of episode one 63,
but at double speed kind of, oh, to be inception, it'd have to be at half speed. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, one of the things I was thinking about is,
you know, how other podcasts are better.
Uh, no, I, I, I've given up thinking further on that one. Other podcasts they'll do like,
like revisit episodes where they're like, Hey, yeah, we're extra lazy today.
So we decided that it was really important to, to play again, episode number 67.
Yeah. Yeah. We don't do that. We talk about the same stuff all the time though.
So we just do it differently. We just do it. We do it the extra lazy way.
I'm too lazy to go find that old podcast. We'll just talk about principle five again.
Any idea at all? We were just talking about.
None. None whatsoever.
So let's just segue right into something else.
Yeah. So we just experienced some technical difficulty and we're both old. And even though
it was one minute ago, we both forgot what the hell we were talking about.
And it's not worth doing playback. All right. So Alan will fix this and edit.
Alan will. So let's go ahead and get, do you mind just getting into the topics for today or
the topic or we'll see how things go. Yeah. Let's go. All right, man. So we had a good question on
one of the three dots slack.com, our slack group, or you can get an invitation by going to
modern testing.org. We had a question in the slack group, uh, from Ryan Quill horse.
Thank you, Ryan, for the question. I think it's a good topic to talk about given
sort of the current economic situation, what's happening across the industry. And also
you and I have some experience here and the questions are, and we'll repeat these, uh,
later as we go through a bit. Something most of tech hasn't had to worry about until recently
is layoffs. I would like to hear, uh, Burton, Ernie's know Bernie, Alan and Brent, uh,
that's us, believe it or not, our thoughts on how to lay someone off in a respectful way,
how to keep a team that is still at the company focused while layoffs are happening
and stories about how past bosses have handled layoffs. And I have lots of stories here I can
share. Um, we were both around for two, at least two big, fairly big layoffs of Microsoft. And maybe
we can just kind of go back and talk through those and I can talk a little bit about
at a high level, of course, about the recent layoffs at unity. Yeah. And I, I, I don't
have it confirmed, but I believe there were recent layoffs at Microsoft as well. Um, I believe I don't
mostly impacted the sales organization. So I, I can't talk about that one. Obviously.
I can't really talk about ours as well, but, but some higher level things I can. So I think the
first, when was it when maybe 2003 ish does sound about right. When we had those big layoffs,
big rig, round of layoffs at Microsoft. No. When was it? I was in engineering excellence
when it happened. So I think I was there from, oh, no, I wasn't. It was after that. Right.
Because I joined that Oregon 2004 or five somewhere in there. Well, there was a big round of layoffs
when I was in MSTV. So that might be around the timeframe. You're talking about right. Because
I was doing the test leadership thing. Uh, but the one, uh, where were you then? The one I'm
remembering was would have been around 2015. Yep. 20. Yeah. Somewhere in there. So that was actually,
I want to talk a little bit more about that one because it actually has some tie-ins to modern
testing, but the first one I remember, and there'll be some stories to come out of here.
I, it went pretty well for the most part. I, I think it's been long enough. I can talk about
this. Don't chime in if you don't need to, because I'm obviously well beyond any NDA sort of stuff.
There were actually like, they, they took all the teams and people that were going to be laid off
and they grouped them. There were, you could be like a type one or a type two layoff. This
is kind of answering the first question a little bit. Um, they were choosing who to be respectful
to. So like the type two layoff, you were just gone with, you know, X number of severance and
like you, you're in a, in a organization that was being removed, but they didn't think you're a
great performer. Then there was kind of the type one layoff. This was their way of keeping,
I don't know if you remember this or not from the ones in 2005 ish, that's sort of the,
then the other one, the other type was we're going to give you, uh, access to a recruiter
and a three month severance while you find your new role at Microsoft. And it, I thought it was
pretty good. Yeah. Yeah. It was a little weird to be why am I type one or type two,
but I think it was usually kind of obvious. The large, large portion of the people I
worked with at that time were, were the higher class. And, and they basically, uh,
of course the problem with those ones, I didn't have any, any employees that were impacted.
Then, but one of the problems, the problems were is, is yeah, they were, they were indicated that
they were laid off and they were given these resources, but a large portion of them just
kept doing their job. And I remember going, what are you doing, dude? What are you doing?
You should not like no amount of brilliant quality code check, uh, check-in is going to save you.
Right. Only you can save you. And what are you doing? Like it was essentially, we're living in,
in most we're living in denials. Some were, were like, uh, it was a work ethic thing. I,
and I honor and respect that, but when you know how many days you have to live,
right? You don't go, and it's measured in, in months. You don't go back to work. Like
you do, you re prioritize. Anyway. So, um, I want to answer that first question, how to lay someone
off in a respectful way, because I have, of course you've seen good and bad. And I do want to talk
about the 2015 ish. I think that was when that was layoffs. So I'm reading this book and this is
going to come up with a second question as well. They recommended it to me after our recent layoffs
and the book is called healing the wounds, overcoming the trauma of layoffs and revitalizing
downsize organizations. Part of it is how to deal with being laid off, but part of it is
the survivor syndrome. How do you keep a morale and, uh, the feelings of anger, betrayal,
et cetera, that occur after a layoff, uh, from affecting the team who are left.
But we'll come back to that in a moment. Um, how would I like optimally lay somebody off?
You do a lot of explaining why in the absence of information, people will assume the worst
possible version of the truth. So if you don't give them enough information, they will just think
that you're, they could think like you're targeting them. You don't care about their
product, et cetera, et cetera. Uh, when you lay someone off, explain when you do a layoff,
you are laying off, you're deciding not to do work. It's an early reduction in force.
So if a project is canceled, the whole team is canceled, baby in the bath water and everything,
but you explain why you explain what led to the business decision and give as much context
as you legally can on why your team and role were chosen to be eliminated. And then also
talk about next steps, talk about if they have options to look for other roles at the company,
how to go about doing that. And then something I got from Reed Hoffman in the Alliance is a,
uh, people don't work at companies forever and ever anymore. Um, they don't join a company out
of college and stay at that company until they retire. People jump around. And what Reed Hoffman
talks about is a book called the Alliance is building an Alliance. Brant, you, you work for me.
I don't expect you to want to work for me forever and ever, but we're going to make,
we're going to make a one to two year commitment, an Alliance on here's what we're going to do
together. Here's what you're going to get out of it. Here's what I'm going to get out of it and be
very transparent. And here's how, here's what success is going to look like when that success
is achieved. We're good. We can decide to either re up that relationship or I can help you find
your next role where you can be successful. Now, when you do a layoffs as a manager, it is still
your role to help. Even when I fire someone for poor performance, my role is still to help them
find their next job where they can be successful. Doesn't mean landing them in a spot, but talking
to them like, let me just get back on my soapbox up here. If I'm firing someone, they aren't
performing in the job, but very likely they're not in the right job or they have some potentially
attitude or cultural problems that aren't making them successful in the role. My job as a manager
is not to just send them on their way, let them figure that out. I want to give them very clear
because we've had, of course, would have had the conversations ahead of time on things
needed to improve and I can continue to give them advice. And I will do everything I can, including
if appropriate, giving them contacts at other companies that I may know.
I have a big slew of recruiters in my contact book. I want to help people find their next job.
I fired people and had them thank me. Now, if I transfer that to laying somebody off,
even more so, this is somebody who's likely not a fireable person. They would have been fired.
They're being laid off because we had a reduction in force. I still want to take some time to give
them every bit of information I can to help them find their next role, either at the company that
we're at in a different role or to continue whatever they want to do in their mission of
growth somewhere else. And that's how I would lay someone off in a respectful way. You were
going to say something in the middle that you probably forgot it.
Yeah. The couple of things. Oh, you were talking about two scenarios that you have discovered
where you end up needing to fire somebody. And I've actually found that it's really just one.
And it's that person and their strengths. And I really, truly, honestly believe
everybody is awesome, but is or can be is is everybody is.
All right. Go on. Go on. And then I'll disagree with you.
But they are awesome in the environment that they're meant to be in. So think of it like
a fish is awesome. But if a fish is dropped out of a hot air balloon,
right, it's going to be a little less awesome for that fish.
Indeed. So part of part of I have had firing somebody is difficult. But I have a very strong
record on people thanking me for the same, same. And surprising. I've been surprised
when it started happening. But yes, I've had the same experience.
I remember the first guy I ever had to fire. I was in a test role and he just simply had
no interest in tests. None. Every time during 101 he was talking about PM features and
customer engagement saying things like that. Couldn't get him to close anything on testing.
And I said, Look, dude, here's the deal. You're not a tester. You're not a tester.
You're never going to be a tester. You're not interested in the job.
You need to go and find a job in a PM role. That is what's going to make you happy.
And I am happy to talk to anyone you want me to talk to and recommend you for that role.
But I'm going to turn down anyone who wants to come and talk to me for a test role.
There is a matrix on this quadrant, I'll call it. But the first read about it in Michael Lop's
book, Managing Humans, which is very good book. And he didn't invent it. But that's where I
first read it called the skill and the will matrix. High skill, high will that by saying
is awesome. And I agree, everyone should be able to make it to that high skill, high will there.
They, they rock it and they love it. Now what you're talking about is you have people that can
be high skill, low will. This is this person, they're in the wrong job. And you also have high
will low skill. There's your entry level people or new to role, new to job. I want to do this.
I don't know how. And you want to make them be awesome. And then you also have the low skill,
low will people who maybe are in the, in the wrong industry. There's all kinds of reasons
for that. So I think that's what you're saying. It's that skill and will everybody can get the
high skill, high will, but as a manager, it's your job to get it's the mix and match of making sure
there are skills, match what you have. But sometimes you don't have that on your team.
Sometimes you don't have that at your company. And when I talk about in the Alliance is recognize
that and, and if needed have a frank conversation with someone say, you know, a great job for
you would be this thing. And I'm not trying to chase you out of the company, but I think
you're going to be a lot happier doing this thing. What do you want to talk about it,
et cetera, et cetera. But there's also what I was talking about is that assumes the person's not
an asshole. I'll make up another matrix on the spot here. Maybe it's not a matrix,
but I'm thinking of sometimes you have people who are living the values of the company. They're,
they're, they're, they're wonderful collaborators. They're just not producing. They're, they're not
delivering on their, they're not getting stuff done. And that's a manageable thing that requires
some coaching. Um, you can get people out of there, but also you have people who are,
and just think back to nineties, Microsoft, when people got stuff done and left a wake of bodies
in the or bodies in their wake, God, I can't tell a story, but think of the person who does
really good work. And you, I know, you know, these people think back in Microsoft,
people who crank out good work, but they're an asshole and they pissed everybody off along the
way. Oh yeah. Yeah. So that, that's not a skill in the willow. That's a different
aspect of the quadrant. I don't want those jerks. I would, that's also could be a coaching issue.
And I will tell you, and we've talked about it before because all my role models did that.
I tried doing that at Microsoft for awhile and, and my Microsoft 360 from like 45 years
it goes over there. Cause I'm sold, but it says, well, when I sat down with HR to go over it,
they said, Alan, everybody loves your work, but they think you're a little bit of an asshole.
I said, Oh, the first time I really thought about it, I'm just doing what all of the people around
me do. But yeah, let me, I don't, I don't enjoy it, but it's, I thought it was what I was
supposed to do. I'm new to the industry. So anyway, I tried to turn a corner sense then
and be an empathetic worker and empathetic leader. And I kind of like it better. It fits
my values more, but I want to get rid of the jerks. Go ahead.
I reinforce the culture of collaboration. I too grew up in the old school Microsoft, right?
Right. I grew up in the, in early Microsoft, uh, in the exchange team run by Brian Valentine.
Oh yeah. Who was there was an, there was an empathetic caring leader that Brian Valentine.
Oh, he was funny. He was funny. Back when we had war room, not ship room, war room.
What was it good for? Absolutely nothing. Say it again. War room. Good God, y'all.
No, it was absolutely good for, you know, uh, soapboxing, um, taking off your shoes,
slamming it on the table to, to get your way. Right. Um, being called an asshole in that
organization was a badge of honor, not an insult. Well, I mentioned Nick Dimmitt here a few weeks ago.
Um, Nick, I know you don't listen, but, uh, Nick once walked out of a war room meeting.
Good God y'all. And kicked a hole in the wall.
Yeah. I would, I would hope I haven't seen anything like that, but I would hope that in
today's culture at Microsoft, that would be a person that would be gone.
Yeah. I think so too. It's just a different, different world. And I get that's good. That's
good. So, uh, say what you're going to say. I want to tie this back to, we're talking about how
to lay someone off in a respectful way and the tangents are part of the show. I acknowledge it.
It's fine. So when it comes to like, when it comes to two priorities, when you say, Hey,
I'm going to get rid of a jerk. Okay. Um, but you may just need to coach the jerk, but,
but yeah, but you may get rid of the jerk. Right. So, so I used to have a policy that it's not
around how do you decide when to fire or lay off somebody. Um, but I used to have a policy, right.
One of the weaknesses of having a belief that everyone is awesome is that you, uh,
particularly if you have a little bit of white night syndrome, you, you just keep trying and you
keep trying and you keep trying. And back in those days, I would try infinitely like, no,
it's my fault. I just haven't communicated. It's the right way. And now I have a, uh,
I have since learned a three strikes and you're out. And it's basically in combination with what
I call the law of decreasing diplomacy, where the first time I communicate to the feet,
you, the feedback, I'm going to use very soft language, very hopeful language, very diplomatic.
The next time I have to talk about the same thing, I'm not going to echo exactly the same
way. Cause I'm going to, I'm going to operate under the assumption that you didn't understand
what I said last time. So I'm going to try a different way of communicating it,
but it's going to be a little bit more assertive. And, uh, the third time is essentially, um,
yeah, it's time for you to find a new home one way or the other. There's multiple ways to
motivate somebody to find a new home, uh, up to and including firing.
Does, does Microsoft still, I have a thought on this. I want to get back to the topic here,
but, um, I had a, uh, just a thought come to me in a fleeting moment of
walking the dog or something, but does Microsoft still do PIPs performance improvement plans?
Uh, no, we don't, we don't have a PIP. There is another process that replaces it. That's,
that's rarely used. So that's, that's one thing.
It doesn't matter. It was going to be, it was, it was maybe a real over rhetorical question to
key up my, um, my thought here is, but let's say I have, and I don't have anyone like us right now.
Let's here's what I thought would be a cool thing for our company to do. This is not reflect what
we're doing nor anybody else has done. I'm sure somebody does it because anytime I have an idea
that I think is good, it's actually been implemented by 50,000 other people. But let's say I have a
employee who's not performing. I kind of want to bring him envelope a and envelope B
because doing any, whether you call it a PIP or something else, any sort of, okay, we needed to
formally document your performance and help get you back on track or help you move out.
That's a lot of work. It's stress on everyone. A lot of work. I want to bring, uh, envelope
a and envelope B envelope. A is here is your package to leave right now. Severance for a long time.
You know, whatever's in the package B is, or we're going to do, we're going to do, uh, some sort of
performance improvement plan to get you back on track, do all the documentation, et cetera, et
cetera, et cetera. But if at the end of that, you don't get, you don't get back on track,
you're gone with no severance. Right. It's kind of like a double or nothing. So yeah. And I think,
think about the people that we've, and again, it's, I'm not suggestion this, uh, I haven't thought
through this enough and I don't work in HR, but my thought was I was thinking through layoffs and
also help managing people out, whatever flavor of the text you want to use. And I've had two
different flavors of that. Um, often by the time it gets there, like I remember one of the
first ones I ever did, it was hard because I was new at it and the person, it did nothing.
And I was thinking, man, if, if I got this message, I would just like, I would double down
work. I was young, so I'd work extra hours. I would make sure I got myself back on track,
but the person really didn't have any, any desire to, to fix any of the things trying to fix.
But some people, I also have people who have, it's been a kick, been the kick in the butt they
needed. And it's like, it turned them around and they were good forever. Those are probably rarer
than the former, but they do happen. And if you had the option there, it's like, yeah,
I can get back on track. I go with plan B anyway, just, just a thought. I had, uh, a bunch of
thoughts came together in my head and I forgot about till right now, one to share it first time,
freely available. But again, I'm not in HR and that would be dumb for you to think that
actually knew what I'm talking about. So if we can, like I kind of go back to laying off,
uh, in a race when it comes to laying off or firing somebody, right? That's a scenario where
the decision's been made, right? And there I kind of fall back to, uh, have you watched the,
my current favorite movie, which is Moneyball. Oh yeah. I've seen Moneyball a couple of times.
Very good. I love it's yeah. Big fan. Okay. Okay. The, the scene where, uh, Brad Pitt's character
makes Jonah's character, uh, inform the, the party baseball player that he's being transferred
to another team. Do you remember that scene? No refresh me and our listeners. All right. So there
was, there was one of the players was always goofing off. Uh, wasn't really taking the,
the baseball seriously for, for the A's. So the manager made a deal and traded him. Okay. And,
uh, in that example, it was very similar to like a fire or layoff and the manager gave it to
his name's Jonah, right? Jonah, Jonas, one of those anyway, Jonah Hill. Yeah. It gave it to
Jonah Hill's character to do the actual, uh, notification that he's being traded. Okay.
And he's like, he was stressing out about that. He was like, okay, this guy just bought a house.
He's got all this headache. Right. And Brad Pitt's character said something I think is very smart.
Right. When the decision is gone, don't drag it out. It's like, Alan, if you knew that you were going
to die tomorrow, you had no choice. You're going to die tomorrow. There's nothing you can do about
it. The only thing you can choose is, do you want a bullet to the head or five bullets to the stomach
and bleed to death choice? Absolutely. Right. And that's kind of my view on layoffs, right? It's,
oh yeah. Yeah. It's, you got to get to the point. You can't do false hope. No, no, no, no. You,
you, you got to make it absolutely clear. This is happening. Nothing you can do about it.
Here is all the other additional information. Good luck. Right. And that additional information is
important. All that. Why? So I want to, so I think we're in violent agreement there. I mean,
there's just the worst way you can do it is to just hand him a piece of paper and walk away
or, or when I was laid off from Chuck E. Cheese's when I was 16 years old,
just stop scheduling me for work. I've had that. I've, I've had that as well.
So I want to talk about the second one. The first one's kind of the last question was stories
about how past bosses have handled layoffs. I think I kind of weave those in indirectly into
the first answer, but I do want to talk about how to keep the team that is still at the
company focused while layoffs are happening because it's always been tough. There is survivor
syndrome and that book I recommended earlier in the podcast talks about this a lot. It's
hard on people. They, they feel like their families cut out and there's a great story from the book.
It says, imagine you're a family of six, four kids. And one day you come down to dinner and, and
the father and mother say, it looks like we're not going to be able to continue to have six
people. We're going to have to make do some downsizing. So, uh, you two pointed to the kids,
you are going to be living with your aunt and uncle and be no longer part of this family.
I'm going to need you to have your bags packed and ready to go this evening. And the rest of
us continue. Then they're gone. They're in shock. And then the next night at dinner,
there's only four, four people sat there. They kind of act like it. You kind of ignore the
big elephant in the room and they say, well, as you know, there's only four of us now.
So we're all going to have to do a little extra work in order to make sure that we can continue
to have the same quality life we have before. And it's like awkward, weird, uh, not the right way
to do it. So keeping the key, keeping the team focused. So what I've done, uh, is just a whole
lot of transparency. I tell you what, man, I have learned so much about being a manager
by going to a therapist. If you want to be a good leader, go get some therapy because you learn
I mean, lots of little tips on listening and empathizing that are really powerful,
but just let people vent, let people vent respectfully, let them feel like they're heard.
Actually that sounds condescending. Listen to them so they feel like they're heard. Don't make them,
don't just make them feel like they're heard. Actually listen to them. Let them know they're
heard. Do what you can to support answer their questions the best you can, uh, acknowledge
that it's hard with fewer people. Now we didn't have layoffs in my team, but we did have a lot of
open headcount cut. So we have some teams that are thinner. Um, we just managed to do it without
laying, laying people off and it's hard. So just, you just acknowledge it and listen and, uh,
remind them what's important. That's okay. If things are delivered slower now, because that's,
that's the way you talk about calendar time is the one thing. I mean, we can't lay it off.
We can't change it. It's just stuck. There's only so much we can get done in a certain
amount of time with a certain amount of people dedicated to an effort, but it's all just to me.
It's massive transparency and empathy. Yeah. And you got to be careful with the empathy
in some regards as well. It depends on the situation, right? How do I put this?
There's a, there's a point in there somewhere. I'm waiting for it.
Yeah. No, the, the, you have to think of it as, or you don't have to. I mean, I do. So I think of it as,
I don't know. You probably know the author of this, this, the storming, forming, norming, uh,
philosophy around. I'm familiar with it. I can't remember who wrote it.
Okay. Yeah. So whatever your big thing like this happens, I just offered in the assumption
that, that we now need to rebuild our team identity.
Well, it, it, it depends. I guess. Then there's other questions. I remember,
I don't remember which one of these, which one of the layoffs we talked about. Okay. But, uh,
oftentimes the criteria around the layoffs, um, are, are, are driven by legal, not by managers.
And that's one thing I think, well, I think a lot of employees I've talked to were surprised by.
It's like a lot of the layoffs, um, managers often find out within hours before the employee does.
Right. And it's because it has to pass a legal standard of fairness.
And also it, you, it helps contain any sort of leakage of that information.
That is true. But I don't, I don't think that's the primary cause. Like with things like,
regardless of things like blind today, that doesn't happen.
So let's look at my interpretation of the question. It's not like during the layoff. So the,
so the question does say while they're happening, but generally the guidance on layoffs from all the,
the business books on this are cut once cut deep, don't do a little bit and then a little more,
a little more, that just creates so much anxiety on the team. Do one, do one and get it over with.
So, and then you're not focusing on when's the next wave, who's next. And I think
Microsoft especially, I think the two layoffs we were part of, uh, both just happened in one
fell swoop with that first one being a little bit different with the different tiers, but
people weren't wondering, okay, now that layoffs have happened, will there be another round that
affects me? You don't want people working that way. Now it is completely true, but
you can only do anything if you're part of the decision committee for around how to roll out the
layoff. Yeah, but I'm completely agree a bullet to the head is better than five. And there's a
lot we don't have control over, but what we do have control over is after the layoffs have happened
and you have everybody else who has survived is how do you help those people with their shock,
their anger, their betrayal. And for that transparency, as much as you can legally,
or as much as you know, and empathy, just listen to them because it's okay to be angry or mad
or frustrated or betrayed, or have any sort of emotions you want about the thing that just
happened that took some of your coworkers away from your company. That's it's okay to have
those feelings. And as a leader, as a manager and keeping that team focused, the telling them to
ignore it and move on is, is going to cause bigger problems. The best thing you can do
to get the team less distracted about that and continue to deliver on the things they need to
is listen to them, empathize with them. This is where I want empathy. It's like, yes,
it is frustrating. Totally get it. I would be frustrated if I were you. It's, it's hard to
get stuff done. And here's what I can tell you on why that's happened. Again, there's a transparency
rinse, lather, repeat. Genuinely listening is absolutely important. Genuinely being genuine
and listening. That is absolutely critical. I think about the last time people wanted to
come and talk to me and not like, this was so unfair. Even the ones that survived. They're like,
and even managers. Okay. I know of a story where one guy who just got promoted, literally
a month out of the promoted, they got laid off. And another guy was on track to being fired.
And he survived. And the manager was like, whoa, whoa. And there was one manager that
owned these two people. Like once he heard about it, he immediately went into high gear,
super, super high achievers stuff, like email, email, call, call, call, trying to get, no, no,
before this announced swap. And he couldn't because the decision has been made.
Also, I don't like that. I don't like the idea of laying, like you lay off the team, the,
not the team, the project, you cancel projects, not it's weird. I know Microsoft has done this
when I come, I want to get back to one other topic before we end here, but it's odd to me
and really hard if you're laying off individual people from a team and not other people from that
team. So it's weird. One thing I want to quickly talk about is that those 2014 or 15 layoffs,
those happened when I was on my sabbatical in the South of France. And this was, I knew it was
coming because we did this exercise. Yeah. Anytime you're filling out a spreadsheet that
talks about what people do, you know, someone's looking for redundancy, et cetera. And that was the
one where modern testing was accelerated at Microsoft because that's one that removed a lot
of the S debt rolls that hadn't already moved into several. If I recall correctly,
Brent's nodding his head. I did my own versions of those spreadsheets as well. It was, it was
more around. So we had some management in, in that layoff, we had about a week, basically like this is
happening. You have a week to you, the management team, the frontline management team. These, these
are the people who are surviving the layoff and you have a week to figure out their new role.
Right. So for example, I was put in charge. So he, he was a former test manager
and in one fell swoop, he was being moved to a dev IC role. And it was, this guy didn't report
to me, but it did fall on me to figure out where he goes. And you had to close that in a week
because you had, because they, when they announced the layoffs, everything had to be buttoned up.
Well, everything was supposed to be buttoned up. I think about, I think back on it now, I'm like,
did it really, could they have, could they not announce it? And then this told us this,
or is that, is that, you know, a second bullet to the stomach?
So when I took, I took almost actually a full three months off, um, two of it in maybe,
where was I? Maybe two and a half in France, another two weeks in Japan on the way home,
ended up going all around the world on that trip. So he went east to France, stayed there
for a long time and then stopped, stopped in Japan on the way home, also flying east. So
made it all the way around the world. But I remember what I, I, I didn't work at all,
but I deleted a bunch of emails. I didn't want to come back to 10,000 unread email. And that
is not an exaggeration because Microsoft, I don't know if it's any different with teams,
but a very email culture, everything communicated over email.
Oh, it's, you know what I don't, it is different with teams, but now it's,
it's everything is communicated in, in teams or email. And I find I find I'm like, okay, I know
this person sent me this information, but how I can't find it. So with us conversation, I mean,
it's, it's the way it should work. And it's great. I'll get back to my story in a second here.
Conversation is in Slack. Information sharing is an email. I also get all my, you know,
approve X approve Y signed this contract, et cetera. So anyway, I'm in the South of France. It's,
it's afternoon, you know, eight hours ahead of the time, I think. And I'm chucking down my second
glass of Rose and having a, having a baguette with some cheese. And I get a high-pri message
from Chris, my boss, acknowledging that I'm, I'm not working, but he said, Hey, just want to
let you know. And I didn't even check that I hadn't read the news or anything. He goes,
just want you to know your job safe. And it was funny. I had like, if I saw a message like that,
today, I wouldn't care either. But a lot of times when I cry, I go, Oh my God, what happened? But
I was like, I don't care. You can, I don't care if it is or not. I'm in the South of France,
sitting on the back patio with a glass with a bottle of Rose and this baguette. I'm,
I'm actually all right, man, whatever you want to do. But, uh, apparently they had just done
a bunch of layoffs and a bunch of good people we work with on Xbox. Uh, after Xbox one shipped,
of course, Xbox, uh, is based on, um, the windows operating system, uh, a couple of different
flavors of it. It's three different OSs. That's a whole different story. That redundancy list was
as they made Xbox and windows more one group was finding redundancy and who did what. So
it was kind of a bummer and I felt the same way. And I probably would have felt worse if I was there
and not in the South of France, but a lot of people that I really liked and people I hung out with and,
and who were really good and they were just gone. So it's always tough. Anyway, that was,
that was my story, but it accelerated modern testing because, uh, teams had to figure out
how to get testing done. And some, just like we've talked about a million times on this podcast,
drink a million times, some teams did it well and had that growth mindset, not a testing mindset,
and embraced it and got really good at delivering quality. And some people, some teams didn't.
I'm kind of curious. I don't know that we talked about it.
Talked about what?
Well, so you and I had different experiences in our times in, in, uh, Xbox. Right. And I
look at it and I was like, wow. Um, well, okay. We had different experiences in our time in Xboxes.
So it's the Xbox's culture claimed to be agile. And I'm like, no, no, they were, they were not.
They were, to use your term, like they, my experience of Xbox was the epitome of fragile.
Um, when I was there, like the epitome and I, and I don't recall, I don't recall the
conversations when they shifted away from no test or were you there during that time?
Remember, yes, because, um, a couple of things happened. Okay. So I tell part of my story here. So,
um, everybody, I mean, windows became this huge division still siloed a little bit,
um, meaning separate a functional org, but instead of a testing org, part of the reason I didn't like
the windows or good all because Michael Fortin who was leading that group, I thought was just a
bumbling idiot and still due to this day. But remember it became a, uh, data science and
telemetry org. Do you remember that sort of shift? And that's where I, I was working for Chris. I
working for Chris on the stupid science project. And I briefly led our air quote data science
and telemetry team and a lot of, a lot of tests, like, no, Steve Roe moved in there. Just,
I think he's a better fit in that org than he was in the test org. So we have examples like that.
Steve Roe member, honorary member of the AB testing podcast. I've been on the show a couple
of times and, uh, yeah. So that's, that's how that shift happened. Um, in our case,
I think there was some testers around still. I can't quite remember trying to get developers
to own testing. I'm not sure what happened after that. Uh, but one cool thing I did then,
or one fun thing was there is a little bit of a consortium of all these different
managers of these new data science teams. And we get together once a week and it was a
huge cluster fudge. Uh, remember Steve Roe being there and other people, I don't remember being
there and conversations like it was really, it was the wrong, they wanted to replace their test
past dashboards with a telemetry dashboard. They, it was, they were thinking it was just wrong.
And, uh, they were trying, but it was just so bad. And this is where, oh gosh, I did,
I put together and taught a seminar to, or, or class to windows developers. What were those
things called? Um, shoot scenarios and measures or something. Some, some, it was, yeah, I like
yeah, there was some real awkward to bad attempts by the brightest and the best there to, uh,
try and figure out how to do telemetry and data. And I'm glad, um, which was weird because a lot
of orgs at Microsoft, even then we're doing it very, very well. It's just windows was behind the
times and trying to figure it out. But, um, anyway, all that stuff was happening, but yeah,
I did that for a while and got really, really bored. And then went to teams where I just got
really, really bad. Yeah. And you made me think about somebody who I haven't thought about in a
while. Um, I had a meeting with their manager about a year ago. No, no, that's a lie. It was
probably a year, a year before COVID. So that was much longer ago. Um, but, uh, I'm not mentioning
last name on purpose, but Chris is no longer at Microsoft. Oh, he had been working in an IC
data science role and I'm seeing him up on LinkedIn. He's taking a break exploring and
learning is what it says. He can, he can go to forward along with Nick and Ken. All right. Anyway,
somewhere in there, talked about layoffs. You get the extra stories too, because tangents are part
of what you get on the Paul and Bernie show Bert, Bert, Bert, Bert, I don't know.
Bert, Bernie, Bert, Bernie, Bert, Bernie Spears,
Bert, Bernie, Bernie, there's your name.
Bernie. Spears.
Spears are awesome. All right. Okay. Everybody we're at a time where way out of time, except
when I edit this and get out of Brent remove all Brent's screw ups and coughing in the time where
he clicked his pen in the middle of him talking. Uh, but yep, there goes again. Oh my God.
All right. Anyway, edit this. I'm still not Paul.
And I might be, we're a train wreck. Welcome to the train wreck podcast. We'll see you next time.
Bye.